These are the exam objectives planned.

Managing public key
infrastructure (PKI) certificates
- Public key
- Private key
- Self-signed certificate
- Digital signature
- Wildcard certificate
- Hashing
- Certificate authorities
• Certificate use cases
- Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)/
Transport Layer Security (TLS)
- Certificate authentication
- Encryption
• Authentication
- Tokens
- Multifactor authentication (MFA)
- Pluggable authentication
modules (PAM)
- System Security Services
Daemon (SSSD)
- Lightweight Directory
Access Protocol (LDAP)
- Single sign-on (SSO)
• Linux hardening
- Security scanning
- Secure boot
• UEFI
- System logging configurations
- Setting default umask
- Disabling/removing
insecure services
- Enforcing password strength
- Removing unused packages
- Tuning kernel parameters
- Securing service accounts
- Configuring the host firewall

Have notes of any of the following? Feel free to [contribute](https://github.com/Joe-Bulfer/Linux-Study-Notes/pulls)!

Collection of my own notes so far.

#### Authentication

Note: Do not confuse authentication with authorization. Authentication is proving you are who you say you are. Authorizing is what comes after, this grants you access to certain resources. 

The following protocols are still widely used and worth studying, however, there are modern authentication frameworks such as Oauth(2006) and OpenID (2005) that are recommended for building modern applications. The main problems are older tools are being written in c (not secure), not web or mobile friendly, and poor developer experience.

See Ubuntu's great article on the history of open source authentication and what lead to Oauth and OpenIP. [Part 1](https://ubuntu.com/blog/history-of-open-source-identity-management-part-1) and [part 2] (https://ubuntu.com/blog/history-of-open-source-identity-management-part-2)

##### SSSD and Pam
PAM itself dates back at least to 1997. A major criticism was it's inability to implement Kerberos on it's own, which led to the monolithic [pam_krb5](https://github.com/rra/pam-krb5) module beginning in 2006. SSSD is more recent with the first release in 2009 which is a modern replacement.

RHEL 7 and Fedora 32 [dropped](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/7.5_release_notes/chap-red_hat_enterprise_linux-7.5_release_notes-deprecated_functionality_in_rhel7) both pam_krb5 and pam_pkcs11 in favor of SSSD.

[SSSD](https://sssd.io/docs/introduction.html) is used to authenticate into FreeIPA and Active Directory.

Packages  `pam_tally` and `pam_tally2` have been deprecated by `pam_faillock` being most recent. The purpose is to maintain a counter of failed login attempts in a given interval to ban the user out after a set number of attempts. Whether that user is banned forever or for a certain time is defined in `/etc/security/faillock.conf`. 

`authconfig` and `faillock` are used in this package.

##### FreeIPA
FreeIPA (Identity, Protection, Auditing) is a suite of technology that is upstream of [RHEL Identity Management](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/linux_domain_identity_authentication_and_policy_guide/introduction) (IdM)
FreeIPA uses 389 DS as it's database which uses the LDAP protocol. FreeIPA also includes SSSD and Kerberos.

Active Directory also uses LDAP protocol.

