Networking tools in Linux vary significantly across distributions.

The newer iproute2 package includes `ss` and `ip` which largely replace commands such as `ifconfig`, `route`, and `netstat`.

On the man page of the netstat command, you can read:
```
This program is mostly obsolete.  Replacement for netstat is ss. Replacement for  netstat -r  is ip route.  Replacement for netstat  i is ip -s link.  Replacement for netstat -g is ip maddr.
```

Like the man page says, the `ss` command has replaced the `netstat` command. Other deprecated programs in the net-tools package include:

`route` and `netstat -r` that have been replaced with `ip route`

`arp` which have been replaced by `ip neigh` or neighbor.

Some useful terminology to learn across these programs:

**inet** - internet protocol family (IPv4)
**inet6** - the modern protocol of IP addresses represented in hexidecimal
**lo** - virtual loop back device/interface for troubleshooting `ifconfig lo`
**wlo1** - wireless network interface (NIC)
**RX** - Receive
**TX** - Transmit

#### Network Monitoring
##### Tshark

`-i` for interface`-f` for capture filter
```
❯ sudo tshark -i wlo1 -f "src port 443"
```
You can also read `-r` from and write `-w` to a file.
##### tcpdump
Similar to tshark, `tcpdump` can also analyze packets on a network.

List interfaces with `-D`.
```
❯ tcpdump -D
1.wlo1 [Up, Running, Wireless, Associated]
2.any (Pseudo-device that captures on all interfaces) [Up, Running]
3.lo [Up, Running, Loopback]
4.enp2s0 [Up, Disconnected]
5.virbr0 [Up, Disconnected]
6.docker0 [Up, Disconnected]
```

The syntax is very similar to tshark
```
❯ sudo tcpdump -i wlo1 port 443 -w tcpdump.pcap
```



##### My Traceroute mtr
[Article](https://www.baeldung.com/linux/mtr-command) on `mtr` command. Combines `ping` and `traceroute` functionality.

`-r` report mode sends 10 packets in the background and write to sdout. Use `-c` to cycle the number of packets.

```
❯ mtr -r -c 15 google.com > report.txt
```

mtr uses ICMP echos by default, but you can use UDP with `-u` and TCP SYN packets with `-T`.

##### Netcat (nc)

nc is known as the swiss army knife of networking. It is very versatile. Check if a port is open with `-zv`. `-z` scans for listening daemons without sending data or establishing a connection, `-v` is verbose.

I will now listen on one machine with with listen `-l` , verbose`-v` and keeping the connection open `-k`.
MACHINE 1
```
nc -lvk 6969
Ncat: Version 7.93 ( https://nmap.org/ncat )
Ncat: Listening on :::6969
Ncat: Listening on 0.0.0.0:6969
```
After already finding the ip address with `ip a`, I can use the `-v` flag to check if the port is open.
MACHINE 2
```
nc -zv 192.168.122.46 6969
Connection to 192.168.122.46 6969 port [tcp/*] succeeded!
```
We can see the output in on the listening machine.
MACHINE 1
```
Ncat: Connection from 192.168.122.1.
Ncat: Connection from 192.168.122.1:55438.
```

##### Checking Open Ports
You want set up a server for SSH, the first step is making sure port 22 is open. Here are the various ways to check.
```
nc -zv localhost 22
ss -tuln | grep ':22'
telnet localhost 22
sudo lsof -iTCP #look for a name with ssh
```

##### Firewalls
Let's say telnet refuses connection and the other commands do not find port 22, this could be UFW (Uncomplicated Firewall) is blocking it. UFW basically a wrapper over `iptables` for Ubuntu.
`sudo ufw status` will let you know if it is enabled or not, and what ports it allows or blocks.

UFW will either use `iptables` or `nftables` by default. Here we can see nf_tables is used, if it wasn't, it would say "legacy".
```
iptables -V
iptables v1.8.7 (nf_tables)
```
iptables is old and nftables if preferred.

To see if you are running the old kernel module behind iptables, run `modinfo br_netfilter`. "br" stands for bridge, because it acts at the layer two (OSI Model) link layer. To see if you are using nftables, grep for "nf" or "nft": `lsmod | grep -E "(nf|nft)"`. Check systemd if you are running firewalld: `systemctl status firewalld.service` 

iptables came out in 2001 and has some problems, such as:
- firewall rules are static
- changes require a complete firewall restart
-  These firewall restarts break stateful firewalling  

nftables is the successor to iptables that allows for more flexible, scalable and performance packet classification. It is developed by the [Netfilter](https://www.netfilter.org/) project. It has been available since 2014 but only had it's first stable release in 2023.

Firewalld is newer and came out in 2011. It is developed by Red Hat

 firewalld New Features
- Dynamically managed firewall
- Supports network zones with trust levels
- Applies changes without restarting the entire firewall
- No need to reload firewall kernel modules

 firewalld Service
- Monitors the firewall
- Provides information via D-Bus
- Accepts changes via D-Bus using policykit

These are the predefined/default firewalld Zones that you can learn more about by running `firewall-cmd --list-all-zones`, `man firewalld.zones`, or reading the [documentation](https://firewalld.org/documentation/zone/predefined-zones.html)
- dmz
- external
- home
- internal
- public
- trusted
- work


 firewalld vs. iptables
- firewall-cmd --zone=public --permanent --add-service=ssh
- iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 22 -m state --state NEW,ESTABLISHED -j ACCEPT

`ufw` and `firewall-cmd` are just front ends to nftables (formerly nftables) the following which you can see 
`sudo nft list ruleset`
`sudo iptables -S`

##### dig, nslookup, hostnamectl, resolvectl
nslookup (nameserver) queries DNS servers translating domain names to machine readable IP addresses, and vice versa.  dig (domain information groper) is just like nslookup but with additional features. 

If you ever see your nameserver as `127.0.0.53` in `/etc/resolve.conf` that just means you are using systemd-resolved.service as the local DNS resolver.
